---
title:  Join diffUSE!
layout: single
author: stephaniewankowicz
excerpt: Open Jobs at diffUSE
categories:
  - posts
tags:
  - meta
comments: true
---
We currently have three positions open on the diffUSE team through Astera.

1) Machine Learning Scientist 

Description: 
The Diffuse Project is seeking a Machine Learning Scientist to join a multidisciplinary team developing machine learning methods to extract hidden functional states from experimental structural biology data (i.e. electron density, structure factors, diffraction patterns, etc.). We are particularly interested in applicants with deep expertise in generative modeling, reinforcement learning, or representation learning who are excited to apply these approaches to real-world structural data. We aim to develop a new generation of tools that treat experimental data as central inputs to model training, validation, and discovery. This role is part of a highly interdisciplinary team of machine learning experts, structural biologists, and biophysicists.
Apply here: https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/astera/73bec1a7-1fe2-4fc3-b68d-84ba40038100

2) Machine Learning Infrastructure Engineer
Description: The Diffuse Project is seeking a Machine Learning Infrastructure Engineer to lead the development of robust, scalable backend systems that power machine learning–driven discoveries in structural biology. You will work at the intersection of scientific research and software engineering, working with researchers to train, test, and deploy ML models directly on experimental data (electron density/structure factors) coming from X-ray crystallography and cryo-EM. This role is ideal for someone with deep experience in ML infrastructure and scientific computing who thrives in a collaborative and product-minded environment. This is a 6-month assignment with potential for extension.
Apply here: https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/astera/31493abf-ccc9-4ea2-bc71-f1ebb5bd10e5 

3) Software Engineer
Description: The Diffuse Project is seeking a Software Engineer to join a multidisciplinary team working to expand the frontier of structural biology by developing methods to capture protein motion. We are assembling a team to develop the process for collecting and interpreting this data from data collection to the final interpretation and scientific impact. You will develop open-source software products to process experimental structural biology data and to manipulate protein structural models. We are particularly interested in product minded applicants who have worked to build products for scientists or other disciplines where a close interface with your users was critical.
Apply here: https://jobs.ashbyhq.com/astera/18327a4b-acfd-46ac-8059-aa06304b0cb5

{% include github-comments.html %}
